content/home/about.md, before:

+++
# About/Biography widget.
widget = "about"
active = true
date = 2018-05-14T00:00:00

# Order that this section will appear in.
weight = 1

# List your academic interests.
[interests]
  interests = [
    "Statistical Learning",
    "Geometric Deep Learning",
    "Image Analysis & Computer Vision"
  ]

# List your qualifications (such as academic degrees).
[[education.courses]]
  course = "PhD in Computer Science"
  institution = "Technical University of Denmark"
  year = 2018

[[education.courses]]
  course = "MSc in Mathematics"
  institution = "University of Iceland"
  year = 2014

[[education.courses]]
  course = "BSc in Mathematics"
  institution = "University of Iceland"
  year = 2012
 
+++

# Biography

I am currently employed as a postdoctoral researcher at *DTU Compute* in the **Image Analysis and Computer Graphics** group. I currently focus my research on Geometric Deep Learning ([gdl Journal Club](http://geo-dl.compute.dtu.dk)). In my PhD I worked primarily on methods and applications in the domain of statistical learning. My PhD thesis is titled [*Sparse Classification - Methods and Applications*](http://orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/146993098/phd471_Einarsson_G.pdf).

The summer of 2018 I will be staying at deCODE genetics in Reykjavik Iceland. I am back at DTU in the fall. I am part of the organizing committee for the group's yearly [summer school](http://optimization-image-analysis.compute.dtu.dk) with DIKU. This year the focus is on optimization in relation to image analysis.

Commit message:

Changes to look and new post about leaving academia

content/home/about.md, after:

+++
# About/Biography widget.
widget = "about"
active = true
date = 2018-05-14T00:00:00

# Order that this section will appear in.
weight = 1

# List your academic interests.
[interests]
  interests = [
    "Statistical Learning",
    "Geometric Deep Learning",
    "Image Analysis & Computer Vision"
  ]

# List your qualifications (such as academic degrees).
[[education.courses]]
  course = "PhD in Computer Science"
  institution = "Technical University of Denmark"
  year = 2018

[[education.courses]]
  course = "MSc in Mathematics"
  institution = "University of Iceland"
  year = 2014

[[education.courses]]
  course = "BSc in Mathematics"
  institution = "University of Iceland"
  year = 2012
 
+++

# Biography

I just **left academia**. I will update this bio when I start the new position. All opinions are my own

I was employed as a postdoctoral researcher at *DTU Compute* in the **Image Analysis and Computer Graphics** group. I focused my research on Geometric Deep Learning ([gdl Journal Club](http://geo-dl.compute.dtu.dk)) and I did a short research stay at deCODE genetics, working on signal processing, image analysis and statistics. In my PhD I worked primarily on methods and applications in the domain of statistical learning. My PhD thesis is titled [*Sparse Classification - Methods and Applications*](http://orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/146993098/phd471_Einarsson_G.pdf). Accompanying my thesis is the R-package [accSDA](https://github.com/gumeo/accSDA), also available on CRAN.
