README.md, before:

# Academic Kickstart

**Academic** is a framework to help you create a beautiful website quickly. Perfect for personal, student, or academic websites. [Check out the latest demo](https://themes.gohugo.io/theme/academic/) of what you'll get in less than 10 minutes or [view the documentation](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/).

**Academic Kickstart** provides a minimal template to kickstart your new website by following the simple steps below.

[![Screenshot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/master/academic.png)](https://github.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/)

## Getting Started

The following two methods describe how to install in the cloud using your web browser and how to install on your PC using the Command Prompt/Terminal app.

### Quick install using your web browser

1. [Install Academic with Netlify](https://app.netlify.com/start/deploy?repository=https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart)
    * Netlify will provide you with a customizable URL to access your new site
2. On GitHub, go to your newly created `academic-kickstart` repository and edit `config.toml` to personalize your site. Shortly after saving the file, your site will automatically update
3. Read the [Quick Start Guide](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/) to learn how to add Markdown content. For inspiration, refer to the [Markdown content](https://github.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/tree/master/exampleSite) which powers the [Demo](https://themes.gohugo.io/theme/academic/)

### Install on your PC

Prerequisites:

* [Download and install Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
* [Download and install Hugo](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/installing/#quick-install)

1. Clone (or [Fork](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart#fork-destination-box) or [download](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart/archive/master.zip)) the *Academic Kickstart* repository with Git: 

       git clone https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart.git My_Website
    
    *Note that if you forked Academic Kickstart, the above command should be edited to clone your fork.*

2. Initialize the theme:

       cd My_Website
       git submodule update --init --recursive

3. View your new website:
      
       hugo server

    Now you can go to [localhost:1313](http://localhost:1313) and your new Academic powered website should appear.
  
4. Read the [Quick Start Guide](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/) to learn how to add Markdown content, customize your site, and deploy it.

## License

Copyright 2017 [George Cushen](https://georgecushen.com).

Released under the [MIT](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart/blob/master/LICENSE.md) license.

[![Analytics](https://ga-beacon.appspot.com/UA-78646709-2/academic-kickstart/readme?pixel)](https://github.com/igrigorik/ga-beacon)

Commit message:

Updating readme with build instructions

README.md, after:

# For building

This currently works with hugo 0.4. There is something breaking in the newest hugo version (currently 0.7). I'm guessing it is because the theme is so far behind. Next time I write a post I will probably structure this "source" for the blog a bit differently and update to master or choose another theme.

# Academic Kickstart

**Academic** is a framework to help you create a beautiful website quickly. Perfect for personal, student, or academic websites. [Check out the latest demo](https://themes.gohugo.io/theme/academic/) of what you'll get in less than 10 minutes or [view the documentation](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/).

**Academic Kickstart** provides a minimal template to kickstart your new website by following the simple steps below.

[![Screenshot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/master/academic.png)](https://github.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/)

## Getting Started

The following two methods describe how to install in the cloud using your web browser and how to install on your PC using the Command Prompt/Terminal app.

### Quick install using your web browser

1. [Install Academic with Netlify](https://app.netlify.com/start/deploy?repository=https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart)
    * Netlify will provide you with a customizable URL to access your new site
2. On GitHub, go to your newly created `academic-kickstart` repository and edit `config.toml` to personalize your site. Shortly after saving the file, your site will automatically update
3. Read the [Quick Start Guide](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/) to learn how to add Markdown content. For inspiration, refer to the [Markdown content](https://github.com/gcushen/hugo-academic/tree/master/exampleSite) which powers the [Demo](https://themes.gohugo.io/theme/academic/)

### Install on your PC

Prerequisites:

* [Download and install Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
* [Download and install Hugo](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/installing/#quick-install)

1. Clone (or [Fork](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart#fork-destination-box) or [download](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart/archive/master.zip)) the *Academic Kickstart* repository with Git: 

       git clone https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart.git My_Website
    
    *Note that if you forked Academic Kickstart, the above command should be edited to clone your fork.*

2. Initialize the theme:

       cd My_Website
       git submodule update --init --recursive

3. View your new website:
      
       hugo server

    Now you can go to [localhost:1313](http://localhost:1313) and your new Academic powered website should appear.
  
4. Read the [Quick Start Guide](https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/) to learn how to add Markdown content, customize your site, and deploy it.

## License

Copyright 2017 [George Cushen](https://georgecushen.com).

Released under the [MIT](https://github.com/sourcethemes/academic-kickstart/blob/master/LICENSE.md) license.

[![Analytics](https://ga-beacon.appspot.com/UA-78646709-2/academic-kickstart/readme?pixel)](https://github.com/igrigorik/ga-beacon)
